
Abstract
The USA had a significant rise in crime related media in the past 20 years due to the development of communication technologies and media. Gun laws and crime frequency itself have been a concern for an increasing amount of the population in the USA, greatly altering the vision of law structures and crime. This project tries to identify the connection between fear of crime, crime related media and general population’s perception of criminals. The project was conducted by reviewing both primary and secondary research concerning this topic. The results showed that crime related media can greatly increase the fear of crime and victimization, particularly in women, although the effect of an individual's race on fear is left ambiguous. Another finding was that, innocent black subjects are perceived to be the perpetrators of crime in a lot of cases regarding suspects and are frequently depicted as criminals instead of victims of police brutality in the news, which inadvertently conceals other types of crime such as white-collar crime. Research on the effect of social class on perception of criminals showed that people from lower social classes are marginalized and are perceived to be more prone to perpetration of crime. While some research suggests that lower social classes do in fact commit more crimes of a certain type, it does not signify that lower social classes commit more crime in general, as higher social classes commit disproportionately more white-collar crimes. However, it was also discovered that media could not be the only factor altering the perception of crime and its true effect is unknown. In fact, some researchers argue that the relationship between crime related media and fear of crime could just be a correlation, not causation. This paper’s recommendation for solving the problem is to reduce the amount of crime related news covered on TV and replace them with more positive news to lower the levels of fear in the population.
Introduction
There has been a significant increase in crime related media in the last 10-20 years, especially in the USA due to development of the communication technologies, broadcasting and entertainment media. Considering the gun laws and the crime frequency in the USA, media covering crime is considerably more prevalent in the USA. The portrayal of fictional characters of law such as lawyers, prosecutors and detectives has led people to believe in false assumptions about evidence collection and court processes (Collica-Cox & Furst, 2019). Crime has also been a concern for rising levels of fear amongst the population (Hatter, 2020). This project will try to identify the connection between fear of crime and the different outlooks of the population on race and social groups of crime perpetrators. This paper has been divided into three main sections. The first section will evaluate the amount of fear caused by crime related media, as well as its connection with race and gender. Next, perception and mental image of criminals will be analyzed, concerning their ethnicity and social group. Lastly, the paper will discuss the low prevalence of media and exaggeration of the effects it has. The essay will argue that the media has exaggerated people’s fear towards crime and law structures by misrepresenting the frequency of crime as well as associating certain social and racial groups with crime, despite people overstating the effect of media.
Fear of crime
Amount of fear
	Depictions of crime in the media have many different effects on human psychology. The first major effect crime related media has on public perception is the unreasonable amount of fear created as a result of consumption of crime related media. Research has shown that violent television, such as local news about crime can significantly increase the amount of fear and concerns for those who consume vast amounts of television (Collica-Cox & Furst, 2019). That could not only alter the viewer's vision of the world, but also change their attitude towards social interactions. In another research conducted by Hatter (2020), the author comes to the same conclusion stating that consumption of violence through TV media can greatly increase the public’s fear of crime. Both researchers theorize that this might be because of the exaggeration of the crimes themselves despite their lower occurrence in the society. In other words, media, news in particular, cover crimes a lot more than other topics, which creates a misconception in viewers that crime happens considerably more frequently than it does in reality. Whether or not this theory holds true, it is evident that crime related media does affect the amount of fear of crime the public has.
Effect of race and gender
	Crime related media often portrays women and certain ethnic groups as main victims of crime. Depictions of crime in the media greatly change the perception of said social groups making them more frightened and aware of crime. According to Bjornstrom et al. (2010) media creates more fear of crime and victimization in women as opposed to men. This can create high levels of discomfort and anxiety, possibly making women more self-aware and nervous in environments perceived unsafe. Rosenberger (2021) also agrees with this statement adding that local news made a significantly higher impact on fear of crime for African American females as opposed to White females, showing that the race of an individual could also have an effect. However, Eschholz et al. (2023) argue that crime-related media had the highest fear impact on white women. It is clear that the two researchers disagree on whether white or African American women have higher levels of fear. Despite the disagreement, it is evident that women fear crime more than men and that race does have an effect, even if it cannot be clearly stated which race has more fear of crime than the other. 
Perception of criminals
Race and Ethnicity
	Crime related media can alter not only the fear of crime in certain ethnic groups but also alter the perception of different ethnic groups. Most prominently, African American ethnicities have been marginalized for perceived greater perpetration of crime. Research has shown that crime is perceived to be more prominent in African American subjects. (Bjornstrom et al., 2010, p. 271). This shows how crime related media can further racial conflicts and racism in general due to fear of crime. In the same research, Bjornstrom also states that studies have shown that African American people were perceived as the criminals in 77% of drug and violence related crimes, while that was true only in 42% of the crimes, showing in action how crime related media can create misconceptions. Moreover, Hatter (2020) states that news media most commonly portray African Americans killed by law enforcement as the criminals rather than the innocent citizens. Additionally, some research suggests that black individuals commit disproportionately less crimes of certain types. According to Cambridge Dictionary (2024), white collar crime is defined as a crime in which a certain sum of money is illegally withdrawn from employers or business associates by their office worker. According to Sohoni & Rorie (2021), the vast majority of white collar crimes are committed by white people. Thus, the media doesn’t only misrepresent certain ethnic groups, but it also does not sufficiently cover crimes committed in different areas by other groups. In conclusion, misconceptions and fear of certain ethnic groups can not only further racism related issues, but bring serious and unfortunate consequences for innocent individuals, as well as concealing other crimes committed by people of other ethnicities. 
Social groups
	Perception of race is not the only factor altered by crime related media, but the social groups as well. People tend to assign lower class individuals with higher probability of crime. According to Garland (2000), the media portrayed image of criminals is commonly tied to undersocialized and under-educated adolescents. This shows how crime related media can label social groups, possibly causing segregation between the social groups. Hatter (2020) also agrees with this statement as the research showed that crime-related media misrepresents certain marginalized social groups in stereotypical ways creating biased expectations towards perpetration of crime. People could be evading those social groups for these reasons, possibly causing unjust treatment for those individuals. However, some research indicates that lower social-economic groups do in-fact commit more crimes of particular type than other groups. Wikstrom & Treiber (2016) showed that young adults from disadvantaged social groups tend to commit more street crimes on average, theorizing the reasons for such behavior to be higher crime propensity and greater criminogenic exposure. While the statistics hold true, it does not signify that the lower class individuals commit more crime in general. In fact the higher class commits crimes too, but different kinds of crime. White collar crime rates are much higher in higher social classes, according to Sohoni & Rorie (2021), being arguably more dangerous to society because of its corruptive nature. In summary, crime is not exclusive to lower social classes, but rather the crimes differ for different social groups. Thus, crime related media can negatively alter the perception of the general population towards lower social classes.
Low prevalence of media 
	Despite the strong evidence for the effect of crime related media on human perception, there is a respectable amount of research stating otherwise. One of the main arguments is that the media is not the only factor affecting the perception of crime. People find the information not only through crime media, but also through friends and acquaintances, as well as personal experience (Birkbeck, 2014), suggesting that the actual amount of effect the media has on perception is ambiguous. Prior (2009) reinforces that idea, stating that many people considerably exaggerate the amount of influence the TV news has, possibly weakening the evidence for the amount of influence the crime related media has on perception considerably. This implies that the relationship between the amount of crime related media watched and the fear of crime could be just correlated and not have cause and effect connection. While those claims certainly weaken the strength of the idea that social media has a great effect on human perception, they do not state that effects of social media are absent, meaning that media is still an important factor in shaping fear of crime and perception of crime for people. Besides, the sources in question have investigated the relationship between general media and its effects, thus it is unclear whether crime related media would have had similar effect or not. Thus, social media can still be considered as one of the important factors in altering the perception of crime and fear of crime in general population
Conclusion
In conclusion, the essay has argued that the media has exaggerated people’s fear towards crime and law structures by misrepresenting the frequency of crime as well as associating certain social and racial groups with crime, despite people overstating the effect of media. This paper has evaluated the amount of fear caused by crime related media, as well as its connection with race and gender, showing that crime related media does in fact increase the fear of crime, particularly in women. It was also identified that race does have an effect, although the sources disagree on which ethnicity has higher level of fear. Furthermore, perception and mental image of criminals was also analyzed, particularly concerning their ethnicity and social group. Multiple research showed that black people were marginalized and/or feared for the possibility of them being criminals, while the media frequently underreports others, possibly creating racism related issues, while inadvertently concealing other crimes. Also, many subjects of unjust police brutality were shown to be the criminals in TV news rather than law abiding citizens, showing the unfortunate consequences of those misconceptions. Moreover, the paper discussed how lower social classes are misrepresented in the media and are associated with crime, possibly causing unjust treatment and further segregation. Despite some evidence showing that certain types of crime are more prominent in lower social classes, this does not indicate the absence of crime in higher classes, where white collar crime, albeit of different nature to street crimes, is more prominent with possibly even more destructive consequences for society. However, the paper also showed that despite the evidence to the contrary, media could not be the only factor influencing fear of crime for people as well as their mental image of criminals, indicating the ambiguity of the actual effect crime related media has. Moreover, the subjects could have greatly exaggerated the amount of influence the media had, undermining the claims of strong effects of the media on fear of crime and perception of crime. Although that could be true, crime related media still has a significant effect on people’s perception of crime. Thus, crime related media should not be discounted as a factor in shaping human perception. As a recommendation, while it is unreasonable to limit the production of entertainment crime related media, this paper proposes that news portraying crime should be reduced and/or changed to more positive news to lower the negative effects of crime related media.
